RFC 66: Self Managed Stack Set Support (#357)
aws/aws-cdk-rfcs: text/66-self-managed-stack-sets.md

---
rfc pr: [#347](https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/pull/347)
tracking issue: https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/issues/66
---

# CDK Self Managed Stack Set Support

As a CDK user, I would like to define stack set infrastructure through native CDK constructs,
 and create/update self-managed stack sets through CDK deploy command.

* **Original Author(s):** @linsona
* **Tracking Issue**: #66
* **API Bar Raiser**: @skinny85

## Working Backwards

### CHANGELOG

* feat(assembly): add stack set artifact type and schema
* feat(core): add stack set core construct
* feat(cli): add logic for cli commands such as `cdk deploy` to collect stack set artifact types
* feat(bootstrap): add default stack set roles for CDK deployments

### README

The `cdk.StackSet` construct in CDK defines AWS resources in a stack set and stack set
 configuration/deployment preferences.
 This is different from the `cdk.CfnStackSet` construct, which requires a CloudFormation stack that then deploys a CloudFormation stack set.
 The `cdk.StackSet` construct creates the stack set directly if it does not exist,
or updates a stack set and existing stack set instances while monitoring the stack set operation.

> #### Prerequisites

Reviewer: Let's divide this section a little more finely. Let's say that there are a few ways you can prepare your parent and child accounts ford deploying StackSets.

1. You can use the `cdk bootstrap` command. Show the exact invocations you need in both the parent and child accounts. And show how it looks in the code.
    - Describe how you can pass the `--qualifier` option to `cdk bootstrap`, and how is that reflected in the code (perhaps there's a `qualifier` property when creating a `cdk.StackSet`?).
2. You can create the Roles manually. Describe what the Roles have to be (names, trust policies permission policies). Then, show how is that reflected in the code (probably properties like `administratorRoleName` and `executionRoleName` of `cdk.StackSet`).

Author: Broke up the section into those two methods

To enable the use of self managed stack sets two roles must exist:

* **Stack Set Administration Role:** Role in the parent account, which is used by CloudFormation to assume the stack set execution role in the child account.
* **Stack Set Execution Role:** Role in the child accounts, which allows the stack set administration role in parent account to assume,
and perform the stack set instance deployment.
* CDK bootstrap provides default stack set roles,
otherwise customers can manually create these roles and specify them explicitly them while defining CDK stack sets

Using CDK Bootstrap to provision default cdk stack set roles:

* Parent Account:
  * Using the parent account credentials and region, run `cdk bootstrap`
  * Specific stack sets resources in bootstrap:
    * A staging bucket to store templates larger than 50kb
    * A default stack set administration role
      * `cdk-${Qualifier}-stack-set-admin-role-{AWS::AccountId}-${AWS::Region}`

>       * Ex. cdk-hnb659fds-stack-set-admin-role-111111111111-us-east-1

Reviewer: Let's skip these details (remember, this is the customer-facing documentation - you don't have to explain all of the implementation details, you just need to provide instructions on how to use it).

Author: Removed -- added appendix section with the bootstrap resource additions

* Child Accounts:
  * Using the child account credentials and region, run `cdk bootstrap --trust <parent account id>`
  * Specific stack sets resources in bootstrap:
    * A default stack set execution role
      * `cdk-${Qualifier}-stack-set-exec-role-{AWS::AccountId}-${AWS::Region}`

>       * Ex. cdk-hnb659fds-stack-set-exec-role-222222222222-us-east-1

Reviewer: Same as above.

Author: Removed -- added appendix section with the bootstrap resource additions

> ---

Author: Yep, good call out

 The `cdk.StackSet` construct creates the stack set directly if it does not exist,
or updates a stack set and existing stack set instances while monitoring the stack set operation.

#### Prerequisites

To enable the use of self managed stack sets two roles must exist:

* **Stack Set Administration Role:** Role in the parent account, which is used by CloudFormation to assume the stack set execution role in the child account.
* **Stack Set Execution Role:** Role in the child accounts, which allows the stack set administration role in parent account to assume,
and perform the stack set instance deployment.

There are a few methods to creating the stack set roles:

1. CDK Bootstrap with default stack set roles
   1. Bootstrap Parent Account
      1. `cdk bootstrap aws://11111111111/us-east-1`
   1. Bootstrap Child Account
      1. `cdk bootstrap aws://22222222222/us-east-1 --trust 11111111111 --cloudformation-execution-policies arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AdministratorAccess`
      1. **Note:** The child account should be bootstrapped to the same region where the parent account is bootstrapped.

>    1. Specifying custom qualifier:

Author: Updated

#### Usage

To define a stack set, extend the core construct `StackSet`.
Then define AWS resources in the same way as defining resources for stacks.
Compared to the `Stack` construct, the `StackSet` core construct has different properties specific to StackSets.
The properties define the configuration of the stack set and the preferences used for update operations.

**Example:**

```ts
import * as cdk from '@aws-cdk/core';
import * as iam from '@aws-cdk/aws-iam';

class PocStackSet extends cdk.StackSet {
    constructor(scope: cdk.Construct, id: string, props?: cdk.StackSetProps) {
        super(scope, id, props);

        new iam.Role(this, 'ExampleRole', {
          assumedBy: new iam.ServicePrincipal('s3.amazonaws.com')
        });
    }
}

// Using default cdk bootstrap stack set roles and default qualifier
new PocStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set-1', {
  faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
  maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,
  regionConcurrencyType: cdk.StackSetRegionConcurrency.PARALLEL,
  //...
});

// Using default cdk bootstrap stack set roles with custom qualifier
new PocStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set-2', {

>   synthesizer: new cdk.StackSetSynthesizer({ qualifier: 'xyz' }),

Author: Yeah was on the fence on this once since this is the pattern for changing qualifier for normal single stack construct. But yeah, can take in qualifier directly

  faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
  maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,
  regionConcurrencyType: cdk.StackSetRegionConcurrency.PARALLEL,
  //...
});

// Using customized stack set roles
new PocStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set-3', {

>   administrationRoleArn: 'arn:aws:iam::111111111111:role/AWSCloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole',

Author: yeah, so this follows the CloudFormation API for create stack set, but we could build the arn based on the CDK creds context.

>   administrationRoleArn: 'arn:aws:iam::111111111111:role/AWSCloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole',

Reviewer: I think we have to (think of the case where the StackSet is env-agnostic).

>   administrationRoleArn: 'arn:aws:iam::111111111111:role/AWSCloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole',

Reviewer: Given that, let's change this to also be a name.

To support stack sets,
a stack set administration role should be created in the parent account and a stack set execution role should be created in the child accounts.
To make this process easier, default roles have been added to the default bootstrap template. (Bootstrapping steps describe in the README section).

```yaml
  # ...
  CloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole:
    Type: AWS::IAM::Role
    Properties:
      AssumeRolePolicyDocument:
        Statement:
          - Action: sts:AssumeRole
            Effect: Allow
            Principal:
              Service: cloudformation.amazonaws.com
        Version: '2012-10-17'
      RoleName:
        Fn::Sub: cdk-${Qualifier}-stack-set-admin-role-${AWS::AccountId}-${AWS::Region}
  CloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRolePolicy:
    Type: AWS::IAM::Policy
    Properties:
      PolicyDocument:
        Statement:
          - Action:
              - sts:AssumeRole
            Resource:
              - Fn::Sub: "arn:aws:iam::*:role/cdk-${Qualifier}-stack-set-exec-role-${AWS::Region}"
            Effect: Allow
        Version: '2012-10-17'
      Roles:
        - Ref: CloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole
      PolicyName:

>         Fn::Sub: cdk-${Qualifier}-stack-set-admin-role-policy-${AWS::Region}

Reviewer: Can we switch this to an inline policy on the `CloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole`?

Author: Yep, will do -- was just following the pattern from the other IAM role resources

  CloudFormationStackSetExecutionRole:
    Type: AWS::IAM::Role
    Properties:
      AssumeRolePolicyDocument:
        Statement:
          - Action: sts:AssumeRole
            Effect: Allow
            Principal:
              AWS:
                Fn::GetAtt: CloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole.Arn
          - Fn::If:
              - HasTrustedAccounts
              - Action: sts:AssumeRole
                Effect: Allow
                Principal:
                  AWS:

>                     Ref: TrustedAccounts

Reviewer: Since this Role has Admin permissions (effectively), can you instead make it trust the `CloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole` from the other accounts instead?

Author: yeah, I can test that out today

Author: Talked offline -- we decided to update bootstrap CLI to to generate the ARNs. There is no way using native CloudFormation intrinsic functions to transform account ids to the specific role ARN format we require.

              - Ref: AWS::NoValue
      ManagedPolicyArns:
        Fn::If:
          - HasCloudFormationExecutionPolicies
          - Ref: CloudFormationExecutionPolicies
          - Fn::If:
            - HasTrustedAccounts
            # The CLI will prevent this case from occurring
            - Ref: AWS::NoValue
            # The CLI will advertise that we picked this implicitly
            - - Fn::Sub: "arn:${AWS::Partition}:iam::aws:policy/AdministratorAccess"
      RoleName:

>         Fn::Sub: cdk-${Qualifier}-stack-set-exec-role-${AWS::Region}

Reviewer: So, I see that `CloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole` has `${AWS::AccountId}` in its name, but this one doesn't.

Why the discrepancy?

Author: So this is the stack set execution role in the child accounts, which must have the same name across all child accounts. (Adding account id would break that)

Reviewer: Ah, of course. This is probably worth a comment in the template body.

---
rfc pr: [#347](https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/pull/347)
tracking issue: https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/issues/66
---

# CDK Self Managed Stack Set Support

As a CDK user, I would like to define stack set infrastructure through native CDK constructs,
 and create/update self-managed stack sets through CDK deploy command.

* **Original Author(s):** @linsona
* **Tracking Issue**: #66
* **API Bar Raiser**: @skinny85

## Working Backwards

### CHANGELOG

* feat(assembly): add stack set artifact type and schema
* feat(core): add `StackSet` construct
* feat(cli): CLI commands like `deploy` now support stack sets
* feat(bootstrap): add IAM Roles for performing CDK stack set deployments

### README

> The `cdk.StackSet` construct in CDK defines AWS resources in a stack set and stack set

Reviewer 2: Please replace "stack sets" (or any variation thereof) with "StackSets" (one word) across this doc. I believe this is the how it is used by the service documentation.

 configuration/deployment preferences.
 This is different from the `cdk.CfnStackSet` construct, which requires a CloudFormation stack that then deploys a CloudFormation stack set.
 The `cdk.StackSet` construct creates the stack set directly if it does not exist,
or updates a stack set and existing stack set instances while monitoring the stack set operation.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add some information about what StackSets are (from the official CFN docs) and a reference to the official docs entry point

#### Prerequisites

To enable the use of self managed stack sets two roles must exist:

* **Stack Set Administration Role:** Role in the parent account, which is used by CloudFormation to assume the stack set execution role in the child account.
* **Stack Set Execution Role:** Role in the child accounts, which allows the stack set administration role in parent account to assume,

> and perform the stack set instance deployment.

Reviewer 2: These roles sounds very much like the ones we use for CDK pipelines. Can't we reuse them?

Author: Yeah, so after discussing with Adam, we decided to go the route of introducing new roles:
* The `Stack Set Execution Role`  names should be identical in all accounts, which is a requirement for how stack sets operate. The current roles in the bootstrap template are suffixed with specific account ids
* The `Stack Set Execution Role` also must trust the `Stack Set Administration Role`, to assume and provision the stack set instance. 
  * In the current bootstrap, the trust flag would give any IAM entity in the account permissions to assume the execution role, which may have a large scope of permission. 
  * This is different from trust given to the ` DeploymentActionRole`, where it only has permissions to to create stack/changeset, and the actual role with large scope of permissions is `CloudFormationExecutionRole` which is not assumable to by the trusted account

      * `cdk bootstrap aws://11111111111/us-east-1 --qualifier xyz`
      * `cdk bootstrap aws://22222222222/us-east-1
            --trust 11111111111
            --cloudformation-execution-policies arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AdministratorAccess
            --qualifier xyz`
      * Qualifier must match in both the parent and child accounts.
2. Manually create roles
   * AWS Guide: [Grant self-managed permissions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/stacksets-prereqs-self-managed.html)
      * The AWS documentation will guide you through creating the Stack Set Administration role for the parent account,
      and the Stack Set Execution roles for the child accounts.
   * The administration role and execution role name should be specified as part of the StackSet properties.

#### Usage

To define a stack set, extend the core construct `StackSet`.
Then define AWS resources in the same way as defining resources for stacks.
Compared to the `Stack` construct, the `StackSet` core construct has different properties specific to StackSets.
The properties define the configuration of the stack set and the preferences used for update operations.

> 

Reviewer 2: Are there any limitations on StackSets comparing to normal stacks? If there are, this is where they should be listed.

**Example:**

```ts
import * as cdk from '@aws-cdk/core';
import * as iam from '@aws-cdk/aws-iam';

> class PocStackSet extends cdk.StackSet {

Reviewer 2: Our convention is not to use namespaced imports for core types:

```suggestion
class MyStackSet extends StackSet {
```

    constructor(scope: cdk.Construct, id: string, props?: cdk.StackSetProps) {
        super(scope, id, props);

>         new iam.Role(this, 'ExampleRole', {

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to include a bit more involved example (i.e. add a bucket or something)

          assumedBy: new iam.ServicePrincipal('s3.amazonaws.com')

>         });

Reviewer 2: Change to 2 space indentation please

    }
}

// Using default cdk bootstrap stack set roles and default qualifier
new PocStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set-1', {
  faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
  maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,
  regionConcurrencyType: cdk.StackSetRegionConcurrency.PARALLEL,
  //...
});

// Using default cdk bootstrap stack set roles with custom qualifier
new PocStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set-2', {
  qualifier: 'xyz',
  faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
  maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,
  regionConcurrencyType: cdk.StackSetRegionConcurrency.PARALLEL,
  //...
});

> // Using customized stack set roles

Reviewer 2: To maintain a good flow for the document, I would put all the information about custom bootstrapping, roles and qualifiers to a separate section at the end "Customizing StackSet Bootstrapping".

new PocStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set-3', {
  administrationRoleName: 'AWSCloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole',
  executionRoleName: 'AWSCloudFormationStackSetExecutionRole',
  faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
  maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,
  regionConcurrencyType: cdk.StackSetRegionConcurrency.PARALLEL,
  //...
});
```

**Deploy Stack Set:**

> To deploy the stack set, the CLI command remains the same: `cdk deploy poc-stack-set`.

Reviewer 2: I understand this is mentioned just after, but when I read this first it wasn't clear to me that when I first deploy a stack set, it won't deploy any instances. Maybe merge the two sections about "deploy stackSets" and "creating StackSet instances" into a single section about deployment.

If the stack set **does not exist**, then CDK will create the stack set directly in CloudFormation.
If the stack set **does exist**,
then the stack set itself will be updated as well as all **existing** stack set instances.

**Creating Stack Set Instances:**

Before creating stack set instances, child accounts should be bootstrapped (or custom stack set roles created) and the initial stack set deployed.

> Stack set instances can be added to the stack set by console/cli/api by specifying the child account id and region.

Reviewer 3: How exactly? Why not via the cdk?

Future stack set deployments though CDK will update the stack set itself, and all existing stack set instances.

## FAQ

### What are we launching today?

The core construct StackSet, which will enable users to define stack sets directly from CDK.
A new Cloud Assembly artifact type for stack sets. CLI changes to enable deploying stack sets through CDK.

### Why should I use this feature?

This core constuct directly creates a CloudFormation stack set vs. provisioning a single stack that deploys a stack set.
The deployment also updates the stack set, updates existing stack set instances, and monitors the stack set operation.

### What is supported?

* Self Manged Stack Sets
  * Create, Update, and Update Existing Stack Set Instances directly through CDK

### What is not supported?

* Service Managed Stack Sets
* Stack Set Instance Add/Remove through CDK

> * Stack Set Deletion

Reviewer 2: What would be the experience of running "cdk destroy"? Maybe we can support `cdk destroy` for StackSets that do not have instances?

  * Stack Set deletion will not be included due complexities with collecting/deleting stack set instances before deleting the stack set itself
* CDK Assets (CDK File Assets/CDK Docker Assets)
  * CDK Assets will not be include in the iteration due to complexities around asset permissioning accross accounts and regions

## Internal FAQ

### Why are we doing this?

Today, CDK does not support the creation and updating of CloudFormation stack sets directly.
This solution would also enable deploying to existing stack sets with low effort.

CDK does provide the `cdk.CfnStackSet` construct, which could accomplish similar behavior.
The difference is that the `cdk.CfnStackSet` construct is a resource in a single CloudFormation stack with the resource type `AWS::CloudFormation::StackSet`,
where stack provisions the actual stack set.
This requires a 1:1 mapping of parameters and tags that need to be passed from the stack to the stack set.
Customer can deploy to existing stack sets, but requires some migration steps.
The customer would need to create a new stack,

> and import the stack set into the resource `AWS::CloudFormation::StackSet`.

Reviewer 3: I'm mostly repeating myself here, but this doesn't cover why this approach is better than using `CfnStackSet`.

We should be talking about this in terms of what we are enabling for users here that didn't previously exist.

### Why should we _not_ do this?

We might not want to do this since CDK does provide the `cdk.CfnStackSet` construct, which could accomplish similar behavior.
The intermdiate stack may not be ideal for some customers, and may require large migration effort for customers who manage many stacksets.

### What changes are required to enable this change?

> To enable this feature, we would need to introduce:

Reviewer 2: What about bootstrap stack changes?

* A `StackSet` construct for customers to extend
* A new assembly/artifact type for the Cloud Assembly
* A new stack set synthesizer
  * A new stack set synthesizer is required to emit new stack set artifact and properties to the CloudAssembly
* Deployment code that creates/updates stack sets using AWS CloudFormation APIs

### Is this a breaking change?

No.

### What are the drawbacks of this solution?

> The handling of CDK assets is more complex than a normal stack CDK app.

Reviewer 2: Sounds like assets are not going to be supported anyway

Stack set instances are deployed independently from CDK context, and exist in different accounts/regions.

> This is dicussed more in the design details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is discussed more in the design details.
```

### What alternative solutions did you consider?

> An alternative is the usage of `cdk.CfnStackSet`, which is not ideal for customers with existing stack sets since there is significant migration effort.

Reviewer 2: I have to say that this does not sound like a good enough reason not to implement this. Migrating from existing infrastructure (either CFN-based or not) is hard in most cases...

What are other reasons for us to support this?

### What is the high level implementation plan?

* Update default boostrap template to include default stack set roles
* Create `StackSet` core construct
* Create StackSet artifact type in the Cloud Assembly
* Create StackSet Synthesizer
* Update CLI to collect StackSet artifact types in addition to Stacks
* Add deployment code for creating/updating stack sets

### Are there any open issues that need to be addressed later?

* CDK asset handling
* Future support for service managed stack sets
* Future support for delete stack set
* CDK Pipelines

## Appendix

### CDK Bootstrap CLI Changes

> To support stack sets,

Reviewer 2: Repeat from above: can we use/expand the CDK pipelines roles we already have in the bootstrap stack? Intuitively these should suffice since CDK Pipelines is basically doing the same thing as stack sets.

a stack set administration role should be created in the parent account and a stack set execution role should be created in the child accounts.
To make this process easier, default roles have been added to the default bootstrap template. (Bootstrapping steps describe in the README section).

**CLI Changes:**

> * Update bootstrap CLI to include new flag `--stack-set`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Update bootstrap CLI to include new flag `--stackset`
```

> * Update bootstrap CLI to include new flag `--stack-set`

Reviewer 2: If possible, it would be nice if we didn't need any of this

---
rfc pr: [#347](https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/pull/347)
tracking issue: https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/issues/66
---

> # CDK Self Managed Stack Set Support

Reviewer: General comment in the file: it's usual in Markdown to leave an empty line after a header. I would do it here everywhere.

As a CDK user, I would like to define stack set infrastructure through native CDK constructs and create/update self-managed stack sets through CDK deploy command.

* **Original Author(s):** @linsona
* **Tracking Issue**: #66
* **API Bar Raiser**: @skinny85

## Working Backwards

### CHANGELOG
- feat(core): New Stack Set core type 
- feat(assembly): New stack set artifcat type and schema
- feat(cli): ```cdk deploy``` collects and creates/updates stack set 

> - feat(lib): API Calls/Logic for create/update stack sets

Reviewer: This is not really a customer-facing feature, so we wouldn't tag it with `feat` in the Changelog 😉. Let's remove it from the list.

### README

> The ```cdk.StackSet``` construct in CDK defines AWS resources in a stack set and stack set configuration/deployment preferences. This is different from the ```cdk.CfnStackSet``` construct which creates a CFN stack that deploys a CFN stack set. The ```cdk.StackSet``` construct creates the stack set directly if it does not exist, or updates a stack set and existing stack set instances while monitoring the stack set operation.

Reviewer 2: Why the triple quotes?

Author: I can change to single or bold, just wanted to highlight

Reviewer: Yes, let's just use single backticks for these. I don't think we need to bold them.

> The ```cdk.StackSet``` construct in CDK defines AWS resources in a stack set and stack set configuration/deployment preferences. This is different from the ```cdk.CfnStackSet``` construct which creates a CFN stack that deploys a CFN stack set. The ```cdk.StackSet``` construct creates the stack set directly if it does not exist, or updates a stack set and existing stack set instances while monitoring the stack set operation.

Reviewer: General comment on the entire document:

Please be cognizant of the line lengths in this file (it should be readable also in its plaintext form).
I like to break lines according to sentence boundaries - it makes any future diff to this file read better than if the newlines are strewn randomly across sentences.

So:

```suggestion
The `cdk.StackSet` construct in CDK defines AWS resources in a stack set and its configuration and deployment preferences.
This is different from the `cdk.CfnStackSet` construct which creates a CloudFormation stack that deploys a CloudFormation stack set.
The `cdk.StackSet` construct creates the stack set directly if it does not exist,
or updates a stack set and existing stack set instances if it does,
while monitoring the stack set operation.
```

Same comment everywhere in the document.

Author: Ah gotcha (my ide was text wrapping), will fix

#### Usage
To define a stack set, extend the core construct `StackSet`. Then define AWS resources in the same way as defining resources for stacks. Compared to the `Stack` construct, the `StackSet` core construct has different props specific to StackSets. The props define stack set configurations and operation preferences for when updates occur.

**Example:**
```ts

> class POCStackSet extends cdk.StackSet {

Reviewer: I feel like the name could be a little bit better here 😉. Anyway, in the CDK, we would call this a `PocStackSet` 😃.

>     constructor(scope: cdk.App, id: string, props: cdk.StackSetProps = {}) {

Reviewer: `scope` should be `cdk.Construct`, and `props?: StackSetProps` saves a few characters over `props: cdk.StackSetProps = {}` 😜.

        super(scope, id, props);

>         new Role(this, 'ExampleRole', {
>           assumedBy: new ServicePrincipal('s3.amazonaws.com')
>         });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        new iam.Role(this, 'ExampleRole', {
          assumedBy: new ServicePrincipal('s3.amazonaws.com'),
        });
```

Some imports at the top of the file would be helpful.

    }

> }

Reviewer: Let's add an empty line after this line.

> new POCStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set',
>     {
>         faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
>         maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,
>         regionConcurrencyType: 'PARALLEL'
>         .
>         .
>         .
>      }
> );

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new POCStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set', {
  faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
  maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,
  regionConcurrency: cdk.StackSetConcurrency.PARALLEL,
  // ...
});
```

```

**Deployment:**

> To deploy the stack set, the CLI command remains the same: ```cdk deploy```. If the stack set **does not exist**, then CDK will create the stack set directly in CFN. If the stack set **does exist**, then the stack set itself will be updated as well as all **existing** stack set instances. Stack sets instances are added to the stack set outside of the CDK context.

Reviewer: Let's avoid using "CFN" here. Let's just spell it out as "CloudFormation".

Same comment everywhere in the doc.

> To deploy the stack set, the CLI command remains the same: ```cdk deploy```. If the stack set **does not exist**, then CDK will create the stack set directly in CFN. If the stack set **does exist**, then the stack set itself will be updated as well as all **existing** stack set instances. Stack sets instances are added to the stack set outside of the CDK context.

Reviewer: Let's be explicit the command can take in the name of the StackSet, like it does for Stacks: `cdk deploy poc-stack-set`.

## FAQ

### What are we launching today?
The core construct StackSet, which will enable users to define and deploy stack sets directly from CDK.

### Why should I use this feature?

> This core constuct directly creates a CFN stack set directly vs. provisioning a single stack that deploys a stack set. The deployment also updates the stack set, updates existing stack set instances, and monitors the stack set operation.

Reviewer: Repeated "directly".

### What is supported?
* Self Manged Stack Sets
  * Create, Update, Update Existing Stack Set Instances

> * File Assets Management

Reviewer: I think this should be simply "CDK file Assets".

Author: Make sense, so I ended up moving this to not supported section. Thinking that this would be handled in a separate RFC?

### What is not supported?
* Service Managed Stack Sets
* Stack Set Instance Add/Remove through CDK
* Stack Set deletion

> * Docker Assets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* CDK Docker Assets
```

Reviewer: I feel like this distinction between Docker and file Assets is not a great idea. I would probably say that either both of them are supported, or neither is, and I'm leaning toward "neither" right now, because of how complex this will be.

Author: So, I ended up moving file asset in general to not supported.

## Internal FAQ
### Why are we doing this?
CDK does not support the creation and updating of CFN stack sets directly, only through an intermediate single stack. This would also enable customers with existing stack sets to utlize CDK to update in the future.

### Why should we _not_ do this?

> CDK does provide the ```cdk.CFNStackSet``` construct, but requires an intermediate single stack to deploy the stack set which does not monitor stack set operations on update.

Reviewer 2: Can you elaborate on this? I am not sure I fully understand the limitations of the L1 and why this is the only way to solve them

Author: Good question! Our original use case was to utilize CDK to deploy to existing stack sets, and eventually to create new stack sets in the future. We originally evaluated CFNStackSet, but the way it worked was by deploying a stack with "AWS::CloudFormation::StackSet" CFN resource that deployed the stack set. We found it a little odd where we found it  to require a stack as a wrapper around stack set.

Originally we thought that importing an existing stack set into a new stack was not supported, but I just did some more testing with CFN resource imports and it does work. The caveat is, we would need to pass parameters/tags from the stack to the stack set, migrate all our stack sets to provision from stack (for our team that is upwards of 5000 stack sets), and update all our existing systems to interact with stack sets through stacks vs directly through stack sets. This migration might not be viable for our team.

I looked through a bunch of related git issues regarding stack sets, do you know what the customer had in mind when asking for "native cdk stack set support"? Trying to gauge if this design aligns with those requests, or if CDK team is recommending CFNStackSet as the pattern for deploying stack sets.

### What changes are required to enable this change?

> Changes are required since CDK currently does not have the concept/logic of deploying stack sets directly.

Reviewer 2: The question is "what" changes

Author: Got it, will update

### Is this a breaking change?

> No - this change does not require customers with existing apps to update code to consume the new CDK version.

Reviewer: Just "no" is fine here 😉.

```suggestion
No.
```

### What are the drawbacks of this solution?
The handling of file assets is more complex than a normal stack CDK app since stack set instances are deployed independently from CDK context and exist in different accounts and regions. This is dicussed more in the design details.

### What alternative solutions did you consider?
An alternative is the usage of ```cdk.CFNStackSet```, which is not ideal for customers with existing stack sets or need to monitor stack set operations during updates.

### What is the high level implementation plan?
At a high level, the implementation will be done in two phases:
* Bootstrapless StackSet
  * Create StackSet core construct

>   * Create StackSet artifact type for manifest

Reviewer: ```
  * Create StackSet artifact type in the Cloud Assembly
```

  * Create Bootstrapless StackSet Synthesizer
  * Update CLI to collect StackSet artifact types in addition to Stacks
* StackSet with file asset support
  * Create Process for bootstrapping to enable file asset support
  * Create StackSet Synthesizer for stack sets that inclue file assets

### Are there any open issues that need to be addressed later?
* Docker asset management
* Future support for service managed stack sets

> 

Reviewer 2: CDK pipelines support

Author: Will add

---
# Implemenation Details

# Requirements
## In Scope Features
* Create Self-Managed Stack Set
  * This should create the stack set directly, as opposed to the [CfnStackSet](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/api/latest/docs/@aws-cdk_aws-cloudformation.CfnStackSet.html) construct which creates a CFN stack that deploys a stack set
* Update Self-Managed Stack Set
  * Update includes updating **all existing** stack set instances 
  * Set Operation Preference Configuration
* File Assets Management

## Out of Scope Features
* Delete Self-Managed Stack Set
* Service Managed Stack Set
* Add/Remove stack set instances through CDK
* Update to only specific stack set instances
* Stack Set Instance Level Parameter Overrides

## Assumptions

> * Management Account contains Stack Set administration role and child accounts contains Stack Set execution role for enabling stack set operations

Reviewer: Not sure I understand this assumption... this should be done as part of `cdk bootstrap` of the child accounts, right?

If there are changes we need to make to `cdk bootstrap` to support this, they should be specified in this RFC.

Author: Yeah, so I'm on the fence. This is a resource that "belongs" to cloud formation stack set, vs something that is specific to cdk. Customer may already have the stack set administration role created, or could create through a stack in CDK.

As for the stack set execution role, this exists in the child account, which CDK would not have context about

Reviewer: Sorry,  I still need more details here.

- How is the management account administration Role created? Manually? Through the CDK? How do we set in the CDK what Role is used?
- How is the execution Role created? Manually? Using CDK?
- Do we require that an account+region be `cdk bootstrap`ped before a StackSet instance of a StackSet managed through the CDK can be deployed to it? Why yes/no?
- How does the CloudFormation service know which Role to use when performing the StackSet instance deployment? Can that be set in the CDK?

All of these questions should be answered here.

  * CLI user experience and how stack/stack sets will be collected under the hood
* [2] [Construct Changes (CDK app) - Stack Set Artifact Type Synthesis](#2-construct-changes-cdk-app---stack-set-artifact-type-synthesis)
  * How stack sets will be defined and prepared for CLI consumption
    * New Stack Set core construct type and artifact type
    * New synthesizer for Stack Sets
* [3] [CLI Changes - Deployment of Stack Set](#3-cli-changes---deployment-of-stack-set)
  * How the CLI will orchestrate the deployment of stack sets
    * Primitives added for making API calls to create/update stack sets
    * Branching between deploying stacks vs stack sets
* [4] [File Assets Management](#4-file-assets-management)
  * How file assets are defined
  * How bootstrapping works with stack sets
  * How file assets are made available to accounts “unmanaged” by CDK and in regions that the stack set deploys to

## [1] CLI Integration - Stack/Stack Set Collection
## High Level CLI/Deploy Flow
![Architecture Diagram](../images/self-managed-stack-sets/high_level_cli_deploy_flow.jpg)
1. CLI calls list/synth/deploy
1. Subprocess invokes CDK App

>     1. StackSet construct generates template and artifact is added to manifest as a new artifact type

Reviewer: ~~manifest~~ -> Cloud Assembly

1. CLI reads manifest

> 1. CLI deploys to AWS environment

Reviewer: Numbers got screwed up here.

Reviewer: Numbers are still screwed up here.

### [1.1] Commands/flags for stack sets
At a high-level, the flow for stacks vs stack sets are nearly identical with a few different configuration parameters and end deployment logic.

**Option 1**: Commands will remain the same and perform actions for both stack/stack sets **(Preferred)**

In this option, the commands can be ran as the are today, and under the hood logic will be branched based on artifact type.

* **Pros**:
  * Unified customer experience for deploying infrastructure
  * Allows deployment of stacks/stack sets in the same execution
* **Cons**:
  * Risk of breaking current stacks flow
  * Under the hood, there will need to be some branching logic between types and changes to stacks collection since the current code is tightly tied to stack artifact types

**Option 2:** Add Separate commands or flag to distinguish between stacks/stack sets

* **Pros**:
  * Isolates stack sets to its own flows -- less risk of breaking stacks flow
* **Cons**:
  * Odd user experience since the user will need to think about when to use commands for stack vs stack sets
  * Some code duplication, since the stack set flow is nearly identical, with some differences in input parameters

>   * Commands will need to be ran twice if the CDK app contains both stacks/stack sets

Reviewer: Let's go with Option 1, and remove Option 2.

Author: Remove -- yeah added originally to have an opposing alternative

CLI commands retrieve stacks from the manifest. The same logic is necessary for a new stack set artifact type, but they are typed for only for *CloudFormationStackArtifact* objects.

**Option 1:** Convert retrieval functions to generics **(Preferred)**

In this option, a new abstract class *CloudFormationArtifact* would be created which *CloudFormationStackArtifact (current)* and *CloudFormationStackSetArtifact (new)* will inherit. Then in the CloudAssembly convert to functions to generics based on the *CloudFormationArtifact* type.

* **Pros**:
    * Less code duplication
    * Less risk of differences in retrieval if updates are made to CloudAssembly for stack/stack set retrieval
* **Cons**:
    * Risk of breaking of how stacks work today
* Example:
```ts
private selectTopLevelStacks<T extends cxapi.CloudFormationArtifact>(stacks: T[],
  topLevelStacks: T[],
  extend: ExtendedStackSelection = ExtendedStackSelection.None): StackCollection<T> {
  if (topLevelStacks.length > 0) {
    return this.extendStacks(topLevelStacks, stacks, extend);
  } else {
    throw new Error('No stack found in the main cloud assembly. Use "list" to print manifest');
  }
}
``` 

> **Option 2:** Duplicate cloud assembly functions explicitly for stack sets

Reviewer: Let's go with Option 1 here, and remove Option 2.

* **Pros**:
  * Isolates code for stack vs stack sets, so less risk of breaking stack flows
* **Cons**:
  * Code duplication and more risk of diff between nearly identical functions

## [2] Construct Changes (CDK app) - Stack Set Artifact Type Synthesis
### [2.1] CDK Artifacts/Manifest

> CDK CLI reads the manifest file after a CDK app is invoked (or directly from a previously generated manifest), and utilizes those directives in the manifest to build Artifact objects for deployment actions. The manifest should include all assets to be deployed as well as configurations on how those assets should be deployed. A new artifact should be created and added to the manifest:

Reviewer: Substitute "manifest" with "Cloud Assembly" everywhere in the document.

### [2.2] CDK Stack Set Construct
Users should be able to to define infrastructure resources in the same way today. AWS infrastructure constructs and synthesis logic are tightly coupled with the “core.Stack” type, where they must be created the the scope of “core.Stack” or utilize “core.Stack” types in logic. Adding a new Stack Set core construct that generates templates in that same way as Stack may require a large amount of refactoring.

**Option 1:** Create a new core.StackSet construct that extends Stack or Abstract Class that StackSet/Stack inherit from **(Preferred)**

**Example Usage:**
```ts
class POCStackSet extends cdk.StackSet {
    constructor(scope: cdk.App, id: string, props: cdk.StackSetProps = {}) {
        super(scope, id, props);

        new Role(this, 'ExampleRole', {
          assumedBy: new ServicePrincipal('s3.amazonaws.com')
        });
    }
}
new POCStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set',
    {
        faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
        maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,
        regionConcurrencyType: 'PARALLEL'
        .
        .
        .
     }
);

> ```

Reviewer: Same comments here for this code example as above.

**Synthesis Flow:**

![Architecture Diagram](../images/self-managed-stack-sets/cdk_stack_set_construct_synth_flow_option_1.jpg)
* User extends the core StackSet construct, and defines infrastructure resources

> * A new synthesizer adds the new stack set artifact type to the manifest

Reviewer: Not sure why do we need a new synthesizer? Why not modify the existing one(s) to handle this?

Author: So writing a POC, I ended up extending `DefaultStackSynthesizer` as `BootstraplessStackSetSynthesizer`

Author: Talked offline, required for emitting additional artifact type and properties

Reviewer: If you could put in the RFC that justification why is a new synthesizer needed, that would be great 🙂.

* Condition should include “isStackSet” for the app to call synthesize on stack set types:
    *  https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk/blob/a760173feaf70af51f0cec4140b4c8124a2c6aed/packages/%40aws-cdk/core/lib/private/synthesis.ts#L157

* **Pros**:
    * Unified user experience for stack/stack set that aligns with normal CDK patterns 
    * No need to pass a stack into a stack set construct, users just extend core.StackSet

* **Cons**:
    * Potentially Large/Complex changes to overall system (Everything that utilizes Stack type may need to be converted)
    * Potentially some areas where stacks/stack-sets do not share same properties, so branch logic required

> **Option 2:** Create a normal “core.Stack“ construct and pass to a new ”core.StackSet“ construct

Reviewer: Let's go with Option 1 here, and remove Option 2.

    * Unexpected bugs only affect stack sets, and not current users of stacks

* **Cons**:
  * Odd user experience for CDK where a stack construct is passed to a stack set construct
  * A stack will exist in the manifest that should not be deployed, so you can’t run --all 
    * We could create another synthesizer for “StackDefinitions“ that is either a new artifact type or skips emitting to the manifest. Potentially also skip deployment of stacks referenced in stack sets.
  * Potential unknown bugs of reusing a stack template generated for a specific environment in a stack set that should be environment agnostic

## [3] CLI Changes - Deployment of Stack Set
### General Flow
![Architecture Diagram](../images/self-managed-stack-sets/stack_set_deployment_flow.jpg)
* User executes cdk deploy
* Stacks and Stack Sets are collected from the manifest
* Branch between deploying stack vs stack set
* Prepare deployment and assets
* Make API calls to deploy stack sets

### [3.1] cdk.ts Changes
This is the initial entry point for the CLI. Both stacks and stack sets will utilize this the same deploy commands without branching. 

### [3.2] cdktoolkit.ts Changes

> This package is responsible for collecting the stacks and assets from the manifest. Changes:

Reviewer: "package" used to mean "file" I'm pretty sure.

* The deploy command will need to include a call described in section 1.2 to also retrieve stack sets
  * const stacksSets = await this.selectStackSetssForDeploy(options.selector, options.exclusively);
* From this point, the flow will branch between stacks and stack sets.

### [3.2] cloudformation-deployments.ts Changes

> This package is responsible for preparing the deployment, orchestrating asset publishing, and infrastructure deployment. Changes:

Reviewer: "package" used to mean "file" I'm pretty sure.

> * New function for orchestrating asset deployment and infrastructure deployment for stack sets. More on asset deployment describe in the Lambda assets section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* New function for orchestrating asset deployment and infrastructure deployment for stack sets.
More details on asset deployment are in the file assets section below.
```

### [3.3] deploy-stack-set.ts
This will be a new file which will contain the logic and api calls for deploying stack sets. Stack sets differ not only in API calls, but also a few service caveats:
* No concept of change sets
* Stack Set Operation Management

### General Flow:

![Architecture Diagram](../images/self-managed-stack-sets/low_level_stack_set_deploy.jpg)
* Check if the stack set exists
  * If not, then create
* If the stack set does exist, check if there are any stack set operations in progress and wait until complete
* When the stack set is ready to accept operations, call update stack set
  * When calling update stack set API, no accounts or regions will be supplied, which will trigger an update on the stack set itself and all stack set instances
* Wait for the update stack set operation to complete

## [4] File Assets Management

> In a normal stack deployment, artifacts are defined within specific AWS resource constructs such as lambda or just the assets construct in general. They are published to S3 and referenced in the generated template by parameters (LegacyStackSynthesizer) or direct injection (DefaultStackSynthesizer). For Stack Sets, the same behavior is ideal, but there are a few more caveats:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a normal stack deployment, artifacts are defined within specific AWS resource constructs such as lambda or just the assets construct in general.
They are published to S3 and referenced in the generated template by parameters (`LegacyStackSynthesizer`) or direct injection (`DefaultStackSynthesizer`).
For Stack Sets, the same behavior is ideal, but there are a few more caveats:
```

* In Scope:
  * File Assets

### High Level Architecture
![Architecture Diagram](../images/self-managed-stack-sets/file_asset_high_level_arch.jpg)
* Before Deploy:
  * Deploy custom bootstrap infrastructure to all regions or regions stack set will be deploying to in management account
* During CDK deploy:
  * Assets are published to CDK Toolkit staging buckets in Management account
  * Stack set create/update is executed in Management Account
  * Stack set instance retrieves artifacts from management Account staging bucket

### [4.1] Bootstrapping

CDK apps that utilize assets require “Bootstrap” infrastructure for storing and publishing assets. This can either be done using the cdk bootstrap command which will deploy a default stack with all the required infrastructure or a customized template. 

### Permissions
Since stack set instances are deployed outside the CDK context and can be deployed to “external” accounts, child accounts need permissions to retrieving assets from the centralized staging bucket in the management account. This can be achieved by adding a bucket policy to the staging buckets:

```json

> {

Reviewer: Can you show the entire resource that you're adding to the bootstrap template here?

Reviewer: Still no resource here.

Author: Added

### Multi-Region Bootstrapping
When an S3 Asset such as Lambda code is referenced in CFN, the S3 asset must exist in the same region the stack is being deployed to. This means all regions a stack set deploys to, the region in the management account must also be bootstrapped. Users can either deploy these individually to each region, or create a stack set that deploys the customized template to each region.

When creating the stack construct that is passed into the stack set construct described in section 2.2, the DefaultStackSynthesizer also needs to be modified with the file asset bucket name. This configures file asset references in the CFN template to reference non-aws account specific buckets. I.e. When stack set instances are deployed, they will reference buckets in the central account.

```ts
const stackDef = new cdk.Stack(app,
  'stack-poc', 
  {synthesizer: new DefaultStackSynthesizer(
    {fileAssetsBucketName: 'cdk-${Qualifier}-assets-000000000000-${AWS::Region}'})});
const stackSet = new cdk.StackSet(app, 'stack-set-poc',
  {
    stack: stackDef,
    faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
    maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,
    regionConcurrencyType: 'PARALLEL'
  }

> );

Reviewer: Let's move this example to the "nice" API.

Author: This was just removed since it was part of option 2

Reviewer: Still here, still not using the "nice" API (the indentation is also weird).

Author: Moved to "nice" API

    * Adding new region is fairly straightforward, running deploy should add latest asset to new bucket
      * This must be done before adding account for new region in stack set
* **Cons**:
  * Make take more time and bandwidth to copy from local machine to each region
  * Additional logic need to be added to iterate regions

**Option 2:** Bucket replication to all regions
Instead of publishing assets directly to every regional staging bucket, assets are replicated using S3 replication from the staging bucket in the region where the stack set is deployed to all the other regional staging buckets.

* **Pros**:
  * CLI does not have to do the work of copying files locally to multiple regions
* **Cons**:
  * Potential for replication lag since it is asynchronous. Most of the time it will replicate within seconds, but has an 99.99% 15 min SLA. A mitigation to this is making API calls to verify objects have been replicated before moving on.
  * New regions will need to manually copy latest artifacts over. Bucket replication only works when new objects are added, and when deploy is ran, the asset will not be re-upload if it already exists

> # Implementation Plan

Reviewer: I feel like this section is duplicated from above, and can be safely removed.

---
rfc pr: [#347](https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/pull/347)
tracking issue: https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/issues/66
---

# CDK Self Managed Stack Set Support

As a CDK user, I would like to define stack set infrastructure through native CDK constructs and create/update self-managed stack sets through CDK deploy command.

* **Original Author(s):** @linsona
* **Tracking Issue**: #66
* **API Bar Raiser**: @skinny85

## Working Backwards

### CHANGELOG

- core: New Stack Set core type 
- assembly: New stack set artifcat type and schema

> - cli: `cdk deploy` collects and creates/updates stack set 

Reviewer: These should follow [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/).

Author: Reformatted

> - lib: API Calls/Logic for create/update stack sets

Reviewer: Like I said before, this should be removed.

### README

The `cdk.StackSet` construct in CDK defines AWS resources in a stack set and stack set
 configuration/deployment preferences. 

>  This is different from the `cdk.CfnStackSet` construct which creates a CloudFormation stack that deploys a CloudFormation stack set. 

Reviewer: I think this is not precisely what happens.

```suggestion
 This is different from the `cdk.CfnStackSet` construct, which requires a CloudFormation stack that then deploys a CloudFormation stack set. 
```

 The `cdk.StackSet` construct creates the stack set directly if it does not exist, or updates a stack set and existing stack set instances while monitoring the stack set operation.

#### Usage

To define a stack set, extend the core construct `StackSet`. 
Then define AWS resources in the same way as defining resources for stacks. 

> Compared to the `Stack` construct, the `StackSet` core construct has different props specific to StackSets. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to the `Stack` construct, the `StackSet` core construct has different properties specific to StackSets. 
```

> The props define stack set configurations and operation preferences for when updates occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The properties define the configuration of the  stack set and the preferences used for update operations.
```

**Example:**

> ```ts

Reviewer: Empty line before this line would be nice.

import * as cdk from '@aws-cdk/core';
import * as iam from '@aws-cdk/aws-iam';

class PocStackSet extends cdk.StackSet {
    constructor(scope: cdk.Construct, id: string, props?: cdk.StackSetProps) {
        super(scope, id, props);

        new iam.Role(this, 'ExampleRole', {
          assumedBy: new iam.ServicePrincipal('s3.amazonaws.com')
        });
    }
}

new PocStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set', {
  faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
  maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,

>   regionConcurrencyType: 'PARALLEL'

Reviewer: This should be an enum. Not a string.

```suggestion
  regionConcurrency: cdk.StackSetRegionConcurrency.PARALLEL,
```

Stack sets instances are added to the stack set outside of the CDK context.

## FAQ

### What are we launching today?

The core construct StackSet, which will enable users to define and deploy stack sets directly from CDK.

### Why should I use this feature?

This core constuct directly creates a CloudFormation stack set vs. provisioning a single stack that deploys a stack set. 
The deployment also updates the stack set, updates existing stack set instances, and monitors the stack set operation.

### What is supported?

* Self Manged Stack Sets
  * Create, Update, and Update Existing Stack Set Instances directly through CDK

### What is not supported?

* Service Managed Stack Sets
* Stack Set Instance Add/Remove through CDK
* Stack Set deletion
* CDK Assets (CDK File Assets/CDK Docker Assets)
  * More information on CDK asset management and complexities described in the [File Assets Management](#4-file-assets-management) section.

## Internal FAQ

### Why are we doing this?

Today, CDK does not support the creation and updating of CloudFormation stack sets directly. This solution would also enable deploying to existing stack sets with low effort.

> CDK does provide the `cdk.CFNStackSet` construct, which could accomplish similar behavior. 

Reviewer: It's `cdk.CfnStackSet`, not `cdk.CFNStackSet`.

Same typo is repeated in many places in the doc.

> The difference is that the `cdk.CFNStackSet` construct provisions a single CloudFormation stack with the resource type `AWS::CloudFormation::StackSet`, and then the stack provisions the actual stack set. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The difference is that the `cdk.CfnStackSet` construct provisions a single resource with the type `AWS::CloudFormation::StackSet`,
and then the stack that that resource belongs provisions the actual stack set.
```

This requires a 1:1 mapping of parameters and tags that need to be passed from the stack to the stack set. 
Customer can deploy to existing stack sets, but requires some migration steps for importing an existing stack set into the resource `AWS::CloudFormation::StackSet` before before being able to use `cdk.CFNStackSet`.

### Why should we _not_ do this?

We might not want to do this since CDK does provide the `cdk.CFNStackSet` construct, which could accomplish similar behavior. 
The intermdiate stack may not be ideal for some customers, and may require large migration effort for customers who manage many stacksets.

### What changes are required to enable this change?

> To enable this feature, we would need to introduce a new StackSet construct for customers to extend, a new assembly/artifact type for the Cloud Assembly, stack set synthesizer, and deployment code that creates/updates stack sets using AWS CloudFormation APIs.

Reviewer: This line is very long, let's break it up.

### Is this a breaking change?

No.

### What are the drawbacks of this solution?

> The handling of file assets is more complex than a normal stack CDK app since stack set instances are deployed independently from CDK context and exist in different accounts and regions. 

Reviewer: Same here (very long line).

This is dicussed more in the design details.

### What alternative solutions did you consider?

An alternative is the usage of `cdk.CFNStackSet`, which is not ideal for customers with existing stack sets since there is significant migration effort.

### What is the high level implementation plan?
* Create StackSet core construct
* Create StackSet artifact type in the Cloud Assembly
* Create Bootstrapless StackSet Synthesizer
* Update CLI to collect StackSet artifact types in addition to Stacks

> 

Reviewer: I feel like we're missing the step where we add the calls to the CloudFormation APIs in the CLI to actually create/update the StackSets.

### Are there any open issues that need to be addressed later?

* CDK asset management
* Future support for service managed stack sets
* CDK Pipelines

---
# Implemenation Details

# Requirements

## In Scope Features

* Create Self-Managed Stack Set
  * This should create the stack set directly, as opposed to the [CfnStackSet](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/api/latest/docs/@aws-cdk_aws-cloudformation.CfnStackSet.html) construct which creates a CloudFormation stack that deploys a stack set
* Update Self-Managed Stack Set
  * Update includes updating **all existing** stack set instances 
  * Set Operation Preference Configuration

## Out of Scope Features

* Delete Self-Managed Stack Set
* Service Managed Stack Set
* Add/Remove stack set instances through CDK
* Update to only specific stack set instances
* Stack Set Instance Level Parameter Overrides
* CDK Assets (CDK File Assets/CDK Docker Assets)
  * More information on CDK asset management and complexities described in the [File Assets Management](#4-file-assets-management) section.

## Assumptions

> * Management Account contains Stack Set administration role and child accounts contains Stack Set execution role for enabling stack set operations

Reviewer: Can we settle on the terminology "parent account" and "child account" here? " Management Account" just sounds weird (and is also weirdly capitalized).

Author: Fixed in all occurences

  * CDK Asset Management Complexities
  * How file assets can be defined
  * How bootstrapping could work with stack sets
  * How file assets could be made available to accounts “unmanaged” by CDK and in regions that the stack set deploys to

## [1] CLI Integration - Stack/Stack Set Collection

## High Level CLI/Deploy Flow

![Architecture Diagram](../images/self-managed-stack-sets/high_level_cli_deploy_flow.jpg)
1. CLI calls list/synth/deploy
1. Subprocess invokes CDK App
1. StackSet construct generates template and artifact is added to Cloud Assembly as a new artifact type
1. CLI reads Cloud Assembly
1. CLI deploys to AWS environment

### Supported Commands:

* cdk diff
* cdk synth
* cdk deploy
* cdk list

### [1.1] Commands/flags for stack sets

At a high-level, the flow for stacks vs stack sets are nearly identical with a few different configuration parameters and end deployment logic.

Commands can be ran as the are today, and under the hood logic will be branched based on artifact type.

* **Pros**:
  * Unified customer experience for deploying infrastructure
  * Allows deployment of stacks/stack sets in the same execution
* **Cons**:
  * Risk of breaking current stacks flow

>   * Under the hood, there will need to be some branching logic between types and changes to stacks collection since the current code is tightly tied to stack artifact types

Reviewer: Let's remove the pros & cons list (we've already made a decision).

### [1.2] CDK Stack/Stack Set Retrieval

CLI commands retrieve stacks from the Cloud Assembly. The same logic is necessary for a new stack set artifact type, but they are typed for only for *CloudFormationStackArtifact* objects.

A new abstract class **CloudFormationArtifact** would be created which **CloudFormationStackArtifact (current)** and **CloudFormationStackSetArtifact (new)** will inherit. 
Then in the CloudAssembly convert to functions to generics based on the **CloudFormationArtifact** type.

* **Pros**:
    * Less code duplication
    * Less risk of differences in retrieval if updates are made to CloudAssembly for stack/stack set retrieval
* **Cons**:

>     * Risk of breaking of how stacks work today

Reviewer: Again, no need for the list - the decision has been made.

* Example:
```ts
private selectTopLevelStacks<T extends cxapi.CloudFormationArtifact>(stacks: T[],
  topLevelStacks: T[],
  extend: ExtendedStackSelection = ExtendedStackSelection.None): StackCollection<T> {
  if (topLevelStacks.length > 0) {
    return this.extendStacks(topLevelStacks, stacks, extend);
  } else {
    throw new Error('No stack found in the main cloud assembly. Use "list" to print manifest');
  }
}
```

## [2] Construct Changes (CDK app) - Stack Set Artifact Type Synthesis

### [2.1] CDK Artifacts/Cloud Assembly

CDK CLI reads the Cloud Assembly after a CDK app is invoked (or directly from a previously generated Cloud Assembly), and utilizes those directives in the Cloud Assembly to build Artifact objects for deployment actions. 

> The Cloud Assembly should include all assets to be deployed as well as configurations on how those assets should be deployed. A new artifact should be created and added to the Cloud Assembly:

Reviewer: Be mindful of the line length please.

* https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk/blob/master/packages/%40aws-cdk/cloud-assembly-schema/schema/cloud-assembly.schema.json

### [2.2] CDK Stack Set Construct

Users should be able to to define infrastructure resources in the same way today. 
AWS infrastructure constructs and synthesis logic are tightly coupled with the “core.Stack” type, where they must be created the the scope of “core.Stack” or utilize “core.Stack” types in logic. 
Adding a new Stack Set core construct that generates templates in that same way as Stack may require a large amount of refactoring.

Create a new core.StackSet construct that extends Stack or Abstract Class that StackSet/Stack inherit from

**Example Usage:**
```ts
import * as cdk from '@aws-cdk/core';
import * as iam from '@aws-cdk/aws-iam';

class PocStackSet extends cdk.StackSet {
    constructor(scope: cdk.Construct, id: string, props?: cdk.StackSetProps) {
        super(scope, id, props);

        new iam.Role(this, 'ExampleRole', {
          assumedBy: new iam.ServicePrincipal('s3.amazonaws.com')
        });
    }
}

new PocStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set', {
  faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
  maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,

>   regionConcurrencyType: 'PARALLEL'

Reviewer: Same note as above.

### [3.2] cloudformation-deployments.ts Changes

This file is responsible for preparing the deployment, orchestrating asset publishing, and infrastructure deployment. Changes:

* New function for orchestrating asset deployment and infrastructure deployment for stack sets. 
More on asset deployment describe in the Lambda assets section below.

### [3.3] deploy-stack-set.ts

This will be a new file which will contain the logic and api calls for deploying stack sets. Stack sets differ not only in API calls, but also a few service caveats:
* No concept of change sets
* Stack Set Operation Management

### General Flow:

![Architecture Diagram](../images/self-managed-stack-sets/low_level_stack_set_deploy.jpg)
* Check if the stack set exists
  * If not, then create
* If the stack set does exist, check if there are any stack set operations in progress and wait until complete
* When the stack set is ready to accept operations, call update stack set
  * When calling update stack set API, no accounts or regions will be supplied, which will trigger an update on the stack set itself and all stack set instances
* Wait for the update stack set operation to complete

> ## [4] File Assets Management

Reviewer: Let's rename this section "CDK Assets handling" (Assets are not managed).

Then define AWS resources in the same way as defining resources for stacks. 
Compared to the `Stack` construct, the `StackSet` core construct has different properties specific to StackSets. 
The properties define the configuration of the stack set and the preferences used for update operations.

**Example:**

```ts
import * as cdk from '@aws-cdk/core';
import * as iam from '@aws-cdk/aws-iam';

class PocStackSet extends cdk.StackSet {
    constructor(scope: cdk.Construct, id: string, props?: cdk.StackSetProps) {
        super(scope, id, props);

        new iam.Role(this, 'ExampleRole', {
          assumedBy: new iam.ServicePrincipal('s3.amazonaws.com')
        });
    }
}

new PocStackSet(app, 'poc-stack-set', {
  faultTolerancePercentage: 10,
  maxConcurrentPercentage: 10,
  regionConcurrencyType: cdk.StackSetRegionConcurrency.PARALLEL,
  //...
});
```

**Deployment:**

To deploy the stack set, the CLI command remains the same: `cdk deploy poc-stack-set`. 
If the stack set **does not exist**, then CDK will create the stack set directly in CloudFormation. If the stack set **does exist**, then the stack set itself will be updated as well as all **existing** stack set instances. 

> Stack sets instances are added to the stack set outside of the CDK context.

Author: Yeah -- added to assumptions, but would be a good idea to add here as well

> Stack sets instances are added to the stack set outside of the CDK context.

Author: Adding a prereqs section

## FAQ

### What are we launching today?

The core construct StackSet, which will enable users to define and deploy stack sets directly from CDK.

### Why should I use this feature?

This core constuct directly creates a CloudFormation stack set vs. provisioning a single stack that deploys a stack set. 
The deployment also updates the stack set, updates existing stack set instances, and monitors the stack set operation.

### What is supported?

* Self Manged Stack Sets
  * Create, Update, and Update Existing Stack Set Instances directly through CDK

### What is not supported?

* Service Managed Stack Sets
* Stack Set Instance Add/Remove through CDK

> * Stack Set deletion

Author: Trying to think about the behavior here since a stack set must delete the stack set instances before deleting the stack set. I think we can include in this iteration, and treat failure to delete instances in the same pattern as a resource failing to delete for a single stack

> * Stack Set deletion

Author: Talked offline, in this iteration, delete will not be supported  and will add reasoning of why

> * Stack Set deletion

Author: Talked offline, scoping out for this iteration since requires collecting all stack set instances and deleting stack set instances before deleting stack set. Add list reasons why its not being added

* CDK Pipelines

---
# Implemenation Details

# Requirements

## In Scope Features

* Create Self-Managed Stack Set
  * This should create the stack set directly, as opposed to the [CfnStackSet](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/api/latest/docs/@aws-cdk_aws-cloudformation.CfnStackSet.html) construct which is defined in a single CloudFormation stack that deploys the stack set
* Update Self-Managed Stack Set
  * Update includes updating **all existing** stack set instances 
  * Set Operation Preference Configuration

## Out of Scope Features

* Delete Self-Managed Stack Set
* Service Managed Stack Set
* Add/Remove stack set instances through CDK
* Update to only specific stack set instances
* Stack Set Instance Level Parameter Overrides
* CDK Assets (CDK File Assets/CDK Docker Assets)
  * More information on CDK asset handling and complexities described in the [CDK Assets Handling](#4-cdk-assets-handling) section.

## Assumptions

* Parent account contains Stack Set administration role and child accounts contains Stack Set execution role for enabling stack set operations
  * https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/stacksets-prereqs-self-managed.html

>   * The Stack Set administration role in the parent account is used by CloudFormation to assume the execution role in the child account. This role can be created manually or may be created through a CDK stack. This `role arn` is passed into the stack set CDK construct properties 

Author: Yeah so the stack set administration role for CloudFormation API is optional property. Optional in a sense that CloudFormation assume the user has created the role with default name: `AWSCloudFormationStackSetAdministrationRole`

Otherwise you can specify in the request for a role with a customized role name. I can make this more explicit in the ReadMe section

>   * The Stack Set administration role in the parent account is used by CloudFormation to assume the execution role in the child account. This role can be created manually or may be created through a CDK stack. This `role arn` is passed into the stack set CDK construct properties 

Author: Talked offline, will include more details and bootstrap workflow for parent and child accounts

>   * The Stack Set execution role in the child is the role assumed by the administration role in the parent account, and utilized to provision resources in the child account. This role should be provisioned manually, and the `role name` is passed into the stack set CDK construct properties

Reviewer: I assume this was supposed to read "child account".

Reviewer: Again, same as above, this is a gigantic bombshell that is not mentioned anywhere in the customer-facing docs of this RFC.

All of this information needs to be moved all the way up to the "working backwards" section of this RFC.

Reviewer: Can you explain why wouldn't we add this Role to `cdk bootstrap`, and require a child account be `cdk bootstrap`ped before a StackSet instance of a StackSet managed by the CDK can be created inside of it?

That seems better than requiring a manually-provisioned Role, no?

Author: Yeah, my thought process for the stack set administration role in the parent account was it is a property of the CloudFormation stack set vs a property of CDK. That being said, I think customer could provision the stack set administration role through CDK as a single stack.

As for the stack set execution role, this one is kind of odd in a sense that it is managed outside of the CDK context. If a customer defines all the child accounts in their CDK app, then they could provision the execution role from CDK, but question might be what is the value of stack sets.

Author: Talked offline, will include more details and bootstrap workflow for parent and child accounts

* Stack Set Instances
  * In this initial release, stack set instances should be added manually to stack set after it was initially created by CDK

>   * Since this initial iteration does not include CDK assets support such as files/docker images, bootstrapping multiple regions is not required. Bootstrapping a single region in the parent account may be required for templates larger than 50kb. 

Reviewer: Line length again.

Reviewer: Not sure I understand what you mean by "Bootstrapping a single region"...? You will need to `cdk bootstrap` in every region you're creating a StackSet with a template > 50 KB, right?

Author: No, so when a stack set is created/update with a template (either inline or through S3), the CloudFormation service itself stores the template and manages the templates. I.e. stack set instances in child accounts don't read from the bootstap bucket

Reviewer: I'm not talking about the StackSet instances though. I'm talking about StackSets themselves (the parent account).

Author: hmmm, if you deploy a stack set in different regions then yes. Generally, a user would only deploy a stack set in a single region which deploys stack set instances to different accounts/regions.

Reviewer: Let's be precise then.

"The parent account needs to be bootstrapped with the `cdk bootstrap` command in each region that a StackSet is to be created in."

Or something like that. In general, the whole point of the RFC is to precisely describe the behavior and requirements of the new functionality.

Author: Talked offline on how we can use bootstrap for default stack set roles

## Non-Functional Requirements

* Implementation does not incur breaking changes for existing users or future feature implementation
  * I.e Current CDK users should not have to convert any other CDK app implementations to accommodate for changes implemented in this design

* Implementation is extensible for future features such as:
  * Self-managed Stack Sets
  * Stack Set Instance Add/Remove
  * Additional asset handling

> # Design

Reviewer: I'm wondering whether this section is useful here. I feel like it goes into a lot of detail that we generally don't go into in the RFC.

@linsona do you want our feedback on some specific part of this section? Because if not, I actually think we should remove it, and this should be just a shared document that's used inside of your team.

Author: Removing the design section
